Basic authentication involves two major steps authentication and authorization.
Authentication validates the identity of the client, and after the client has been authenticated,
authorization determines if the client should be granted access.
In this lesson, you will start securing the contacts API.
Start by launching the starter project by following this path in your course resources.
One more thing inside of your resources folder.
There should be a JSON file that we're going to use to build a postman collection.
So once you download it, please import the JSON file.
Now, if I go over here, you should have a contact requests collection.
I did this just so we can save some time, and you don't have to recreate all of these requests from
scratch.
Anyways, assuming that you've launched your starter project, go ahead and run it.
Please pause the video until you have done so.
And you'll notice there is an issue from postmen.
I can make a request to any of these endpoints without passing in any credentials, and spring boot
will authorize every single request.
Here, I'm creating a contact named John Snow.
Here, I'm reading all of the contacts, so on and so forth.
This is not good.
We need to impose some security rules.
Here are the rules that we need to apply to our filter chain.
The delete contact ID path requires authentication.
Furthermore, we can only authorize admins to access the delete operation.
The post operation also requires authentication.
But this time we can authorize users and admins to access the post operation.
And finally, the gut operations can be accessed by anybody and everybody.
There is no authentication required.
Let's start with step one.
We will start by adding the spring boot security dependency.
If you're using VS code, just go to add starters and then add the spring boot security starter dependency.
Spring Security Select five dependencies and proceed.
All right.
And if you're using IntelliJ, just go to the Central Maven repo and grab it from there.
You won't need to include the version number as it will already be specified in the parent.
POM All right, and by adding this dependency we get access to all sorts of modules that provide authentication
or authorization.
And so actually by virtue of just adding this dependency, all of our operations are going to be blocked,
they're going to be protected, thus prompting the user to log in before they can make any requests.
So let's actually run the app again and see this in action.
And I will zoom in a little bit.
It looks a lot better now.
All right.
If I go to my browser and I'll say local host 8080, I will try to access the contact with an idea of
one.
Redirects me to a login page.
Now we do not expect browsers to be interacting with our API.
It would probably be some sort of client built using React or Angular or it could even be another API
that's calling this API.
Or in this case it's a mock front end client like Postman.
So we don't really care about browsers and this login page will disappear as soon as we override the
default config and add our own security filter chain.
That being said, what is the security filter chain?
A security filter chain is a bean that describes a chain of security rules, also known as filters.
The filters that you define inside the security filter chain is going to catch all of the HTTP requests
that are made.
The security chain, depending on how it's configured, it's going to filter out requests that it deems
are invalid.
And it's going to allow certain requests that it deems valid.
As we just mentioned, the filter train is a bean.
And as you know by now, we can define beans inside of classes marked with the configuration annotation.
So we'll go back here and create a new folder called Security.
And inside the folder create a new file called Security Config dot java.
And we're going to annotate the security config class as a source for being definitions.
So we give it the configuration annotation and now we're ready to define some beans.
All right.
Before we do so, I left you a link in the resources folder.
Pause the video and click on it.
All right.
If by the time you're watching this video, the link that I gave you doesn't work.
Don't worry about it.
Just follow along.
And the reason why I took you to this page is because if you do end up researching spring security codes
on your own, you're going to see this a lot.
Web security configure adapter, the configure adapter as a spring boot, 2.7.0 has been deprecated.
So before what you would do is inherit from this class and then override a method from which you can
set up a filter chain.
But we don't do that anymore going forward.
As it says, we define the security filter chain as a bean.
So we're going to go ahead and copy this over.
And for now, remove everything inside the bean definition.
We're going to start from scratch.
We'll say bean import the following security filter chain.
HTTP security.
And if you weren't able to access the website for whatever reason, just take some time to write this
down.
Beautiful.
Now we can finally start with step one, and that is our delete operation requires authentication.
To start, we're going to make sure that any HTTP request that goes through our security filter chain,
does it have the authority to perform whatever operation it's trying to perform?
So first we authorize requests.
How will we implement authorization?
How do we determine who has access to what?
We'll talk about that later.
For now, another rule we have to add to our security filter chain is that any request needs to be authenticated.
All right.
And and then we can say.
We're going to authenticate these requests using basic authentication.
And now I can return the security filter chain by saying Return a HTTP dot build.
Which builds our object, which is then registered as a bean.
Anyways, this pretty much reads like English.
Any request that gets caught in the filter chain will need to be authorized.
It will go through basic authentication in order for it to be deemed valid and build creates an object
from our config and that object will be saved as a bean.
Now we're not quite done setting up basic auth, but what I'm going to do is just rerun my code for
a second.
Only to show you that if I were to go back to the browser and make another request to get, I don't
know the contact with an idea of one.
The login UI would be gone, and rightfully so.
We don't really want a UI for our API.
Nevertheless, all of the paths inside of our application are now protected.
So if I wanna make a get request of any sort, it's going to prompt me to enter a username and password.
But we're not going to be doing that from our browser.
We'll be doing it from Postman.
But the thing is, even though we can figure it out, our security filter changed to require basic authentication.
We didn't provide any usernames or passwords, so it has no credentials to reference in order to authenticate
clients.
So what we need to do is register a user details service bin that contains user details.
Spring security is basic auth depends on this user information in order to authenticate credentials
from incoming clients.
So what we need to do is create a been.
Specifically a public user details service been.
And we'll just call the method users.
It doesn't really matter.
And what this is going to do is return a bunch of user details.
The first user is going to be an admin.
User details.
Admin is equal to user.
So when you're importing user, please import the one that comes from.
Org dot spring framework.
Dot Security.
Where is it?
Anyways.
You get the point.
I can't find it.
So User Builder, we're going to build a user that has a username of admin.
A password of admin pass.
You can choose whatever password you want.
Dot built.
All right.
And the users details are going to be stored in memory.
So what we can do is say return new in memory.
User Details Manager.
Saving.
The admin user.
And as a rule of thumb, you should never, ever let me stop the application.
All right.
Back to what I was saying.
As a rule of thumb, never, ever store passwords in plain text inside the main class.
There is code that defines a B crypt password encoder being uncommon -- and make the necessary imports.
Decrypt password encoder.
And we should be good.
Decrypt is a hashing algorithm that's used for password protection.
And when you perform a one way hash on a password, you can never get back the original input.
For example, what if we apply a one way hash on the password?
Hello.
After a one way hash, you cannot convert it back.
It's done.
But that's the thing.
From the server side, we do not care what the password is in plain text.
We only care that the client knows the password.
So here the client is passing in a username of riaan and a password of hello.
In real life there would be 64 encoded before being shipped off.
But for the sake of clarity, I didn't do that anyways.
The way that spring security can match the password in plain text against an encrypted password, keeping
in mind that it has no idea what this password translates to is it's smart enough to apply the same
hashing algorithm that we used here, apply the same number of rounds using the same salt values.
Overall, if it ends up producing the same hashed password, using the same algorithm, then you know
that you have a match.
The only thing that I want you to take away from this is that you should never save your passwords as
plain text.
You need to encode your passwords.
You need to encrypt them.
And spring boot security will take care of the rest.
Don't you worry.
So we'll go back to our code.
We're going to auto wire the bean that we just registered over here.
So we'll say Private B crypt password, encoder, password, encoder.
And I think we might have Lombok.
We do.
So we can just say all ARGs constructor.
Okay.
Automatically auto wiring the password encoder.
Now, obviously, you have to ignore the fact that we literally have the password hardcoded over here.
In a more realistic scenario, there would be some sort of sign up process anyways.
We'll be doing that once we implement JWT.
Right now all I want you to do is encode this password before saving it in memory, password and code.
And there you go.
We will not be saving the password in plain text will be saving the hashed password.
All right.
And before we start testing our app, let us create another user that basic auth can use for authentication.
Um.
Let me fix my indentation.
Let's call the variable user because the user name will be user and the password will be user pass.
All right.
And now, before we run our app, every user needs to be assigned a role for authorization purposes.
So anyone who logs in with the following credentials will be given a role of admin.
And anyone who logs in with these credentials will be given a role of user.
Let me just save the user in memory as well.
And all right.
I think we're ready to test this baby out.
Let's run our app.
Okay.
We'll go to postmen, and I'm going to try to make a gut request.
I'm going to try to access all of the contacts without including any credentials.
And we get back a401a401 means that it was not able to validate our identity authentication failed.
Remember from the last video http requests include a header.
So here, inside of authorization, what I want you to do is go to basic oath.
And conveniently, when we do this, the authorization header will be automatically generated when we
send the request.
That's awesome.
So here my admin username and my admin password that I had put in before.
You can see that they have been based 64 encoded and they have been automatically preceded by the basic
keyword.
If I were to copy this into any base 64 decoder.
You can see that it's admin admin pass.
Our username and our password are preceded by the basic keyword, as you saw in the last video when
we discussed the authorization header.
So we were able to define this header as part of our post request over here.
Looking good.
So we can go ahead and just send this request.
And beautiful.
We get back a status of 200, it allowed us to make the get request that retrieves all contacts.
And if we look at the response body, we can see that it gave us the correct payload.
All right.
Now we have a bit of an issue.
If I were to remove the auth credentials from the header.
So if I were to just say no auth.
Now you can see our authorization header is gone.
If I were to do that and now send our request, it somehow works.
Well, this is weird.
Before, when we made a request without credentials, it didn't work.
Then we did it with credentials.
It did work.
But then upon removing them, it still works.
That's kind of weird.
That's because after the previous user was authenticated, Spring Boot Security actually created an
HTTP session for them.
That session that was created is now stored inside of a cookie.
And now the request will still work through session based authentication, even if we don't provide
credentials.
So if I go here and I remove the cookie.
In turn, removing a recession.
Now we have no session, no authentication credentials.
So if I were to make that request again.
It would not work for one unauthorized.
You need to authenticate.
But the real issue is that when we make a request with a valid credentials.
And Spring Security authenticates.
We can then authenticate through a session.
We do not want to bring security to create a session that follow up requests can use for session based
authentication.
We want the entire request and response lifecycle to be stateless.
We don't want any sessions to be created for security purposes.
So at the end, what I'm going to do is say.
Dot and.
Dot.
Session management session.
Create policy.
Session creation policy.
Stateless.
This pretty much disables session creation on spring security.
You can actually read exactly what it does.
Spring security will never create an HTTP session.
Nice.
So now I can go back and try this out.
I'm going to give valid credentials.
We'll say admin and admin pass because we configured spring security to not create an HTTP session.
If I were to remove the credentials.
It doesn't work.
We're always going to need to authenticate every request using basic auth.
They need to always provide a username and password in the request.
And that is amazing.
We've already made so much progress.
Now, if you'll remember, there are actually four steps left, so let's pick up where we left off in
another video.